.TH haveged 8  "January 15, 2013" "version 1.7" "SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
haveged \- Generate random numbers and feed linux random device.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B haveged [options]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The HAVEGE (HArdware Volatile Entropy Gathering and Expansion) algorithm harvests
the indirect effects of hardware events on hidden processor state (caches,
branch predictors, memory translation tables, etc) to generate a random sequence. 
The effects of interrupt service on processor state are visible from
user land as timing variations in program execution speed. Using a branch-rich
calculation that fills the processor instruction and data cache, a high resolution
timer source such as the processor time stamp counter can generate a random sequence
even on an "idle" system.

In Linux, the hardware events that are the ultimate source of any random number
sequence are pooled for distribution by the /dev/random and /dev/urandom device
interface. The standard mechanism of harvesting randomness for the pool
may not be sufficient to meet demand, especially on those systems with high needs
or limited user interaction. Haveged provides a daemon  to fill /dev/random
whenever the supply of random bits in /dev/random falls below the low water mark
of the device.

Haveged also provides a direct file system interface to the collection mechanism
that is also useful in other circumstances where access to the dev/random interface
is either not available or inappropriate.

The size of the processor level 1 instruction and data caches are used to tune
the HAVEGE algorithm for maximum sensitivity. The sizes of these caches may be input
directly on the command line. For sizes not specified, haveged will attempt to determine
the sizes dynamically from the Linux sysfs and/or cpuid instruction with a fallback
to a compiled default (usually 16k) if better information is not available.

Haveged includes a run time test facility based upon the test suite defined in
the AIS-31 specification from the  The German Federal Office for Information Security
(Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik). The test suite consists
of 9 statistical tests packaged into two test suites ("A" and "B"). The tests
can be run at initialization (a.k.a. a "tot" test), or continuously to monitor
all output. Failure of a suite will terminate execution unless explicitly waived
in the onlinetest command line option.

Procedure A contains 6 test procedures. The first test, 'test0', is run once. This
is followed by 257 repetitions of the FIPS140-1 tests, 'test1' through 'test4', and
an auto-correlation test, 'test5'. The fixed size of the Procedure A input makes
it ideal for continuous use but test5 is several orders of magnitude slower than
any other individual AIS test. As an alternative for those who cannot tolerate
this load, procedure A variants A<n> are provided that execute all included tests
but executes test5 only every 2^n repetitions.

Procedure B contains 3 tests, 'test6', 'test7', 'test8'. Because first two tests
check the distribution of disjoint bit sequences, the input size for the test
is variable. The last test provides an entropy estimate of the input which
makes this test well suited to the haveged daemon role.

Each test procedure requires more than 1MB of data. In those cases where a continuous
test procedure cannot be completed in the available buffer space (see --buffer), the
complete buffer will be discarded on a single failed individual test and a refill
initiated to resolve the outcome of the built in retry before additional data becomes
available.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
-b nnn, --buffer=nnn
Set collection buffer size to nnn KW. Default is 128KW (or 512KB).
.TP
-d nnn, --data=nnn
Set data cache size to nnn KB. Default is 16 or as determined dynamically.
.TP
-f file, --file=file
Set output file path for non-daemon use. Default is "sample",
use '-' for stdout.
.TP
-F , --Foreground
Run daemon in foreground. Do not fork and detach,
use '-' for stdout.
.TP
-i nnn, --inst=nnn
Set instruction cache size to nnn KB. Default is 16 or as determined dynamically.
.TP
-n nnn, --number=nnn
Set number of bytes written to the output file. The value may be specified using one
of the suffixes k, m, g, or t. The upper bound of this value is "16t" (2^44 Bytes = 16TB).
A value of 0 indicates unbounded output and forces output to stdout.
.TP
-o <spec>, --onlinetest=<spec>
Specify online tests to run. The <spec> consists of optional 't'ot and 'c'ontinuous
groups, each group indicates the procedures to be run, using "a<n>" to indicate a
AIS-31 procedure A variant, and "b" to indicate AIS procedure B. The specifications
are order independent (procedure B always runs first) and case insensitive. A "w"
can be appended to any test token to make the test advisory only. The default is
"ta8bcb" if run as a daemon and "ta8b" otherwise.

For example, the string "tbca8b" is suitable for an AIS NTG.1 device (use procedure B
for the "tot" test, then cycle between procedure A8 and procedure B continuously for
all further output). The default is "tb". Resources are allocated only for tests used,
in minimal resource situations, "tc" can be used to disable all testing and avoid
all test resource allocations.
.TP
-p file, --pidfile=file
Set file path for the daemon pid file. Default is "/var/run/haveged.pid",
.TP
-r n, --run=n
Set run level for daemon interface:
.RS
.P
n = 0 Run as daemon - must be root. Fills /dev/random when the supply of random bits
 falls below the low water mark of the device. This argument is required if the
 daemon interface is not present. If the daemon interface is present, this takes
 precedence over any -r value.
.P
n = 1 Display configuration info and terminate.
.P
n > 1 Write <n> kb of output. Deprecated (use -n instead), only provided for backward
compatibility.
.RE
.TP
-v n, --verbose=n
Set output level 0=minimal, 1=config/fill items, use -1 for all diagnostics.
.TP
-w nnn, --write=nnn
Set write_wakeup_threshold of daemon interface to nnn bits. Applies only to run level 0.
.TP
-?, --help
This summary of program options.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The following diagnostics may be issued to stderr upon termination:

.RE
Cannot fork into the background
.RS
Call to daemon(3) failed.

.RE
Cannot open file <s> for writing.
.RS
Could not open sample file <s> for writing.

.RE
Cannot write data in file:
.RS
Could not write data to the sample file.

.RE
Couldn't get poolsize.
.RS
Unable to read /proc/sys/kernel/random/poolsize

.RE
Couldn't initialize HAVEGE rng
.RS
Invalid data or instruction cache size.

.RE
Couldn't open PID file <s> for writing
.RS
Unable to write daemon PID

.RE
Couldn't open random device
.RS
Could not open /dev/random for read-write.

.RE
Couldn't query entropy-level from kernel: error
.RS
Call to ioctl(2) failed.

.RE
Couldn't open PID file <path> for writing
.RS
Error writing /var/run/haveged.pid

.RE
Fail:set_watermark()
.RS
Unable to write to /proc/sys/kernel/random/write_wakeup_threshold

.RE
RNDADDENTROPY failed!
.RS
Call to ioctl(2) to add entropy failed

.RE
RNG failed
.RS
The random number generator failed self-test or encountered a fatal error.

.RE
Select error
.RS
Call to select(2) failed.

.RE
Stopping due to signal
.RS
Signal caught

.RE
Unable to setup online tests
.RS
Memory unavailable for online test resources.


.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Write 1.5MB of random data to the file /tmp/random
haveged -n 1.5M -f /tmp/random
.TP
Generate a /tmp/keyfile for disk encryption with LUKS
haveged -n 2048 -f /tmp/keyfile
.TP
Overwrite partition /dev/sda1 with random data. Be careful, all data on the partition will be lost!
haveged -n 0 | dd of=/dev/sda1
.TP
Generate random ASCII passwords of the length 16 characters
(haveged -n 1000 -f - 2>/dev/null | tr -cd '[:graph:]' | fold -w 16 && echo ) | head
.TP
Write endless stream of random bytes to the pipe. Utility pv measures the speed by which data are written to the pipe.
haveged -n 0 | pv > /dev/null
.TP
Evaluate speed of haveged to generate 1GB of random data
haveged -n 1g -f - | dd of=/dev/null
.TP
Create a random key file containing 65 random keys for the encryption program aespipe.
haveged -n 3705 -f - 2>/dev/null | uuencode -m - | head -n 66 | tail -n 65
.TP
Test the randomness of the generated data with dieharder test suite
haveged -n 0 | dieharder -g 200 -a
.TP
Generate 16k of data, testing with procedure A and B with detailed test results. Note c test never completes
haveged -n 16k -o tba8ca8 -v 33
.TP
Generate 16k of data as above with larger buffer. Note c test completion
haveged -n 16k -o tba8ca8 -v 33 -b 256
.TP
Generate 16m of data as above, Note c test completions with default buffer size.
haveged -n 16m -o tba8ca8 -v 33

.SH SEE ALSO
.TP
libhavege(3), cryptsetup(8), aespipe(1), pv(1), openssl(1), uuencode(1)

.SH References

.I HArdware Volatile Entropy Gathering and Expansion: generating unpredictable random numbers at user level
by A. Seznec, N. Sendrier, INRIA Research Report, RR-4592, October 2002

.I A proposal for: Functionality classes for random number generators
by W. Killmann and W. Schindler, version 2.0, Bundesamt fur Sicherheit in der
Informationstechnik (BSI), September, 2011

.I A Statistical Test Suite for the Validation of Random NUmber Generators and Pseudorandom Number Generators for Cryptographic Applications,
special publication SP800-22, National Institute of Standards and Technology, revised April, 2010 

.SH AUTHOR
Gary Wuertz <gary@issiweb.com> and Jirka Hladky <hladky jiri AT gmail DOT com>

.SH REFERENCES
http://www.issihosts/haveged/
